---
title: Bridging Healthcare and Tech
image: /assets/images/speaker.png
author: Carol Calderon
categories:
  - Career development
layout: post
---

## How I Pivoted from Nursing to Data Science

Hi there! I’m Carol, let me take you through my story. I began my career as a nurse in Colombia, working 7 years in the clinical field, leading the organ transplant team. It was a role that carried immense responsibility.

### The Challenges That Sparked My Curiosity

During those years I had the privilege of working with various specialized medical teams, each with unique expertise. I faced and witnessed several challenges in healthcare, challenges I frequently found could be solved by improving our data processes.

So, I wanted to improve several processes, but I realized I didn’t have the skills or knowledge, particularly regarding data and technology. It was frustrating—knowing there were better solutions, but not knowing how to implement them.

### The Turning Point: Discovering Data Science

I saw the opportunities for change, and I was less comfortable in my role. I knew I wanted to be part of the change but I didn’t know where I could start.

Curiosity and my willingness to ask questions helped me to find the path I was looking for. I discovered data science, it opened my eyes to a new world of possibilities. At that time it was not as popular as it is now, then for my peers, I was a bit crazy.

Also during the pandemic, working from home gave me time to reflect. I realized that a better work-life balance was possible, and I could keep working on my passion for improving health care at the same time I could explore new professional paths.

After a lot of reflection, I told my husband about my new goals and dreams. I was committed to learning English and transitioning into data science. We began exploring options and we found them.

### Starting from Scratch in a New Country

We saw in Canada alignment with our values and interests. Toronto became our adventure destination. I adapted quickly to the city and started enjoying this place from day one. My favourite things about this city? Cultural diversity, nature and food.

But I had to start from scratch. I dedicated 6 intensive months to learning English and applied my nursing background to working as a caregiver. I also learned about how to learn more efficiently, not everyone has the same learning style and finding mine was beneficial. 

### Taking the Leap: Enrolling in Data Science

As soon as I felt I was ready, I enrolled in a data science diploma. I was hesitant—this was so different from nursing—but I pushed through, and I excelled in applying new skills and working on projects with people from different backgrounds and fields of expertise.

For my final project, I applied machine learning techniques to optimize the emergency department admission process. It was rewarding to see that my background as a nurse gave me insights that enriched the final predictive model.

### A New Role: Teaching Assistant and Data Analyst

Soon after, as I did great as a student I became a teaching assistant at the data science school. This opportunity made me feel so proud of myself and more confident about my new abilities. I worked there for 3 months. 

Then I landed at Surgical Safety Technologies as a Medical Data Analyst. SST is a Canadian company developing AI solutions to improve surgical care. What SST is doing is amazing and their products are saving lives and making surgeries safer.

### Lessons from My Journey

I remember the first time I was reading about data science, I had no idea how to organize all of that in my mind. But that’s the process, start at any point and be patient and consistent.

Of course, this process hasn’t been easy. There were times when things felt uncertain. The journey isn’t a straight line, but every step is valuable, bringing you closer to where you want to be.

### Embrace Curiosity and Opportunities

This story could sound a bit extreme, migrating also means sacrificing a lot, but when unlocking opportunities we do not necessarily need to make huge changes, small changes can be quite fun as well.

Opportunities don’t just appear; we have to be willing to be uncomfortable and go outside our comfort zone. Be curious. Build relationships. Take risks. I would say that the best place to find ideas and opportunities is through others.

### Looking Ahead

Today, I'm Proud of my transition from nursing to data science. With the AI boom, I feel so happy to be part of this when it's crucial to ensure diverse representation in tech to make sure innovations are human-centred approach, responsible and ethical.

So, I’ll keep exploring, open to opportunities to advance my technical skills, enjoy my life and positively impact our society using data science. Don’t hesitate to reach out to me if you are interested in this like me.

